From the New York Times, [music] I'm
Michael Bubaro. This is the Daily.
Today, [music]
over the past few years, members of the
Supreme Court's liberal minority [music]
have voted over and over again to oppose
the court's conservative [music]
majority, offering what might look like
a united front of resistance. [music]
But behind the scenes, my [music]
colleague Jodie Caner has uncovered
growing tensions between those liberal
justices over the best [music] way to
fight back.
It's [music] Wednesday, December 10th.
Jody
>> Michael,
>> good to have you back in the studio.
>> Great to be back with you.
>> You are very well along in a line of
reporting that in my estimation has
pulled back the curtain on the unseen
decision-m that goes on among the nine
justices of the Supreme Court at a
hugely consequential moment for the
court. Yes, we want to understand not
only the legal decisions they're making,
but we're asking who are these nine
people who hold this much power and how
do they function together as a body? How
do they influence one another? How does
power flow inside the Supreme Court? And
we're doing it at a time when the court
is deciding these major questions about
how much power President Trump will
have. Who can he fire? Can he go around
Congress to defund an agency? Can he end
birthright citizenship? What is going to
happen to his tariffs program?
>> The court is literally looking into
almost all those questions. They're
determining the contours of his power.
And the liberal justices who, as you
know, are badly outnumbered, see
President Trump as a threat to the
constitutional order. And they want to
persuade their conservative colleagues
of that point of view. But
>> no simple task.
>> Exactly. This is a wing of the court
that holds very little power right now
and it's trying to use what little power
it has to mitigate the rightward lurch
of the court. But the liberal justices
are split on the best way to do that.
>> Okay. Based on your reporting, what
exactly does this split on the left look
like? Well, the starkkest split is
between Justice Elena Kagan and Justice
Katanji Brown Jackson
who have taken very different approaches
to countering the conservative dominance
of the court and you see a real tension
between [clears throat] their two
different approaches emerging.
>> And where should we begin to tell that
story?
>> Well, let's go back to the first moment
when one of these people arrives at the
court. Justice Elena Kagan appointed in
2010 by President Barack Obama. Now, she
is appointed specifically to be a
diplomat. Interestingly, I found out she
was recommended to President Obama by
Justice Antinine Scalia.
>> So, you've got the kind of
>> a very conservative justice recommending
a pretty progressive one.
>> Oh, you've got this duke of conservative
legal thought saying, "Send us someone
smart. Send us Elena Kagan.
>> Send us a former uh dean of Harvard Law
>> who had a reputation
for treating conservatives well,
inviting them in, being a good diplomat
at Harvard Law School, getting
conservative faculty appointed.
>> And at the time that she gets to the
court, what is its ideological mix
looking like? And what kind of decisions
are coming out of that court?
>> Well, it's a 54 court. It leans
conservative, but not by that much. And
right at the center, you've got Justice
Anthony Kennedy, who was appointed by a
Republican, but sometimes voted with his
liberal colleagues, and the Chief
Justice, John Roberts, definitely
conservative, but had a desire to be
independent.
>> Mhm. So, a conservativeleaning court
where surprising things can happen.
>> Things were still up for grabs. And so
she comes to the court and she's never
been a judge before, but she's very
strategic and she comes up with a
methodology of her own for how to
operate on a five4 court.
It's like I love the stuff where we can
all really engage each other, try to
persuade each other,
>> where it's an uphill battle for her, but
she has some chance of prevailing. And
we're an institution, we're a very
collegial institution, notwithstanding
the fact we have all these opportunities
for disagreement. [music]
>> And her methodology is to form
relationships and look for areas of
agreement. So she becomes a confidant of
Chief Justice Roberts
>> who's part of the conservative majority.
>> Exactly. She also keeps a really close
eye on Justice Kennedy. She is following
his moods, his concerns, his
inclinations. And people who worked with
them at the time even joked to me that
she knew what he had for breakfast every
morning. [music]
>> There are some things that we do where
almost nobody is persuadable, but there
are a lot of things we do where [music]
folks are. And
>> she took notes on what her colleagues
thought in conference meetings.
There are instrumental reasons for sure
to get along with everybody and to
maintain good relations with everybody
because
>> and what she's trying to do is find
common ground with them, build consensus
>> do that these questions matter and
they're important and I often have
strong views about them and the most
>> and she's trying to win outright [music]
[clears throat]
>> which she does in some cases.
>> How so? So, for example, President
Obama's healthcare law was challenged
over and over by conservatives, and
several times the cases made it up to
the Supreme Court. And at least in two
of those cases, it was close. People did
not know which way it was going to go.
And the law survived in part because
Justice Kagan and others on the court
helped build liberal and conservative
coalitions. Mhm.
>> So, let's call those on balance
victories for liberals. They were
complicated, but they were victories.
>> Mhm. That she helped achieve.
>> Exactly. And she's also doing this other
thing, which is winning by losing.
>> How does that work?
>> Well, um, now within a particular case,
there is often an ability to compromise
things out. And [music] you know,
>> if you're a Supreme Court justice and if
you're a Supreme Court justice in the
minority and if you can't win, what you
want to do is make the outcome less bad
from your perspective,
>> which which you the way that often
happens in um the court's business is by
sort of redefining issues a little bit.
Like if you narrow the issues, it tends
to be that you'll have greater
consensus. Whereas [music] if you like
>> people who worked with her said that she
would say things in private like let's
make this opinion 30% better
>> going to do you have to keep talking and
you have to find ways of like
readjusting the issue or of convincing
each other and over the course of that.
[music]
>> So there's this 2018 case called
Masterpiece Cake Shop. This is the
Colorado Yes. the Colorado [music] cake
baker case. And there's a baker who says
because of my religious beliefs, I
should not be required to bake cakes
[music]
>> for a samesex wedding.
>> For a samesex wedding. So what happened
[music] in this case is that it looked
like a loss for liberals. The court
decided [music]
in the baker's favor. However,
thanks to Kagan and others behind the
scenes, they decided on grounds so
narrow that the [music] result was
pretty meaningless.
>> The whole point of the Supreme Court is
to set precedent
>> that applies broadly to cases that are
comparable.
>> Exactly. And in this case, it was such a
restricted decision that it barely
applied to others. It was a very hollow
victory for conservatives.
[music]
So in this era of a five to four court
where Kagan and the Liberals know for
the most part they're going to lose the
biggest cases. She has clearly found a
way to make legal lemonade out of
lemons.
>> She's getting business done. It's an
atmosphere in which a dealmaker can get
some traction. And that requires
sacrifice by the way. requires
discipline
>> because
Justice Kagan did object to some of the
court's decisions and she is fully
capable of punching hard
>> and there are a couple of decisions in
which she lets loose on the court but
for the most part she decides that it
doesn't serve her mission
>> right if you're Justice Kagan and you
want to keep getting business done with
a conservative majority
A little bit of honey is going to go a
long way.
>> Totally. These people serve for decades
together. A slight can last a lifetime.
And in fact, in my reporting, I even
found an example where she wrote a very
strenuous descent,
>> disagreeing exactly with the court's
decision and with the chief justice's
opinion, but she took lines out of it. M
>> her original
draft
really had gone hard after the chief
justice, but before the decision became
public, she softened it. She took those
lines out. So that's the approach that
Justice Kagan takes. Keep the peace,
make deals,
and then about a decade into her
service, everything changes. All right.
Uh we have uh a breaking news right now.
Ruth Bader Ginsburg has passed away
>> in September of 2020. Justice Ruth Bader
Ginsburg dies.
>> A loss rocking the political universe.
Tonight, the battle lines over the
court's future already being drawn.
Let's begin [music] with
>> today. It is my honor to nominate one of
our nation's most brilliant [music] and
gifted legal minds to the Supreme Court.
>> She is quickly replaced, as we remember,
by Justice Amy Coney Barrett.
>> There've only been 114 Supreme Court
justices in history. So, everyone is
important, but this one is especially
important because it will put six
conservatives on the court.
>> And all of a sudden, it is a 63
court. And Amy Coney Barrett is not just
any conservative justice. She's put
there by President Trump pretty [music]
explicitly to deepen the conservatives
hold over this court.
>> Correct. The perception is not that he
has appointed just some regular
conservative justice, but that she has
been put there to complete the 50-year
conservative legal revolution. Please y
oppose America.
>> PLEASE OPPOSE AMERICA.
>> Confirm her. Now
her
>> she is heralded on the right as kind
[music] of a conservative judge of their
dreams.
>> She's a very religious woman. She's got
seven kids. The right and the left both
decide they know exactly what that
means.
>> She is derided on the left. She is a
fulfillment of the very long dream of
the bishops in the United States to
overturn row [music] to deny people
contraception and ultimately just to
control women's fertility.
>> She is called a handmaidaid. She is
called a [music]
throwback.
>> We know why he picked Amy Coney Barrett.
We know what she's sent to do and we
know what she's going to do.
>> Things just look hopeless for the
Liberals. It it looks like they're going
to be locked out for a generation,
[music]
>> right? There's kind of a liberal death
sentence heir
to this moment.
>> Correct. It's just not clear if they're
going to have any opportunity to win.
And sure enough, pretty soon the court
overturns Ro v. Wade and completes that
50-year conservative legal revolution.
>> Right. It didn't take very long.
>> No.
>> And so I have to imagine that for
Justice Kagan, that strategy of trying
to build consensus and win influence
with the conservatives in the court,
that doesn't really seem like it's going
to work anymore.
>> Yes. And just to give you a sense of how
despondent the liberals were in that
moment, think back to the descent they
co-wrote in the Dobs case. The three
liberal justices, including, of course,
Justice Kagan, explicitly stated their
sadness at the court's ruling. They
wrote, "With sorrow for this court, but
more for the many millions of American
women who have today lost a fundamental
constitutional protection, we desent."
>> So, this is a real low point. But
something interesting is also happening
in this moment, which is that Amy Coney
Barrett turns out to have an independent
streak. She's voting with the liberals
sometimes, especially in smaller cases.
And when she votes with the
conservatives, she sometimes says that
she doesn't fully agree with them. For
example, she says very clearly that she
disagrees with Justice Clarence Thomas's
use of history in several important
opinions. She says, "You're going too
far. I don't agree with your
methodology." And then it turns out
behind the scenes she had not even
wanted to take dos the case that
overturned Row.
>> Just explain that.
>> She told colleagues, "This is too soon.
This is too fast. So here, President
Trump has cast her in this position of
this mother with seven children is going
to be the capstone vote to overturn the
federal right to abortion. And in fact,
she walks into the court and says, "I'm
not so comfortable playing an assigned
role." So even though she ultimately
does vote to overturn Row, we learned
that she was ambivalent, especially
about the timing of doing that.
>> Exactly. She did not want to take that
particular case.
>> So what does Kagan do with that
information? She has a little bit of an
opening perhaps with Justice Amy Coney
Barrett, but for the most part, she's
just going to keep losing.
>> Well, my understanding is that she was
very torn. On the one hand, you're
right. She does see a little bit of an
opening. She and Justice Barrett are
forming something of an intellectual
bond. But I think the question that
Justice Kagan has at this point is
whether Justice Barrett, not to mention
Chief Justice Roberts, are ever going to
vote with the liberals on the really big
cases in this era, the gamechanging
ones. And if not, is it worth continuing
to hold back, trying to find common
ground? So at this point, Justice Kagan
is struggling to figure out what her
best strategy is,
what she tells people close to her is
that she's agonizing. She's saying to
herself, "Things are changing. Is
diplomacy still going to work
or do I need to get more
confrontational?" Hm. [music]
>> And just as she is trying to puzzle that
out, a new liberal colleague arrives on
the court who is far less torn about
those questions.
[music]
We'll be right back.
So Jody, talk about this new justice who
arrives on the court as we all know it's
Katanchi Brown Jackson and what she does
to this dynamic that you have been
describing.
>> So Justice Jackson arrives at the
Supreme Court in 2022. I am humbled and
honored to be here and I am also
>> and first of all she's got a different
biography, a different set of influences
than Justice Kagan.
>> How?
>> Listen, she's got a lot of the markers
of membership in this club. She's got
double Harvard degrees. She was a clerk
at the court.
>> But in some ways, her experience is very
different. All of my professional
experiences, including my work as a
public defender and as a trial judge,
have instilled in me the importance.
>> She's a former public defender. Needless
to say, she's the first black woman on
the court, and she turns out to be kind
of an outsider figure. I have dedicated
my career to ensuring that the words
engraved on the front of the Supreme
Court building, equal justice under law,
are a reality and not just an ideal.
Thank you for this historic chance to
join the highest court. But also the
court she arrives on is very different
from when Justice Kagan arrived in 2010.
This is a 63
court that has just overturned
major precedents.
>> Right. Kagan arrives on a 5-4 even if
she ends up in a 63.
>> As one of my sources puts it, the
difference between four votes and three
votes is more than one. The difference
is so so so big. And Jackson comes onto
a court where she just knows she's going
to be in descent for much of her career.
>> She doesn't feel the same possibility
that Justice Kagan did.
[music]
So she begins to explore different ways
of making her voice heard
>> such as
>> well for one thing she's more outspoken
[music]
in oral arguments.
>> Justice Jackson.
>> Yeah. So two two questions. Is there any
indication from
>> seniority is a really big deal at the
Supreme Court and there's kind of this
tradition that the junior justice defers
>> so I'm sorry can I just help [music] I I
don't understand are you saying that
>> and according to public tabulations
justice Jackson is really exceeding
everybody else in air time
>> are part of this inquiry too so no one
>> I don't think so I think it's to show
that you have racial segregation [music]
>> there's this great quote from her where
she says I am not afraid to use my voice
>> even in the admissions.
>> All right, I have little time. I'm
sorry.
>> No, I'm sorry. I don't
>> Yeah. So, but you say they've changed
the process, but now at least they're
not looking. [music]
>> And then she's doing kind of the same
thing in opinions, writing separately.
Meaning the way it works on the Supreme
Court is that Michael, if you and I are
in the same coalition and if you're
writing the opinion, I usually just go
with whatever you're going to say, even
if I don't like agree with every word.
>> Offer a few edits and swallow hard.
>> Yeah. The traditional attitude is like,
Michael is taking this one. He's going
to speak for the coalition. It's not
exactly the article I would have
written, but
>> I'll stick with you.
>> Okay. She wants to be a little bit more
specific.
>> There are some times when
even after the principal descent is
written, I have a slightly different
perspective or a different take on
something or this is an issue
>> and she speaks up in a way that's a
little unusual for a junior justice
>> where I will say forgive me justice but
I need to write on this case. It took
the chief justice
16 years after he arrived on the court
to do separate writing, like his own
little separate side dish of his own
legal reasoning. Justice Jackson starts
doing it immediately. Um, and it's
because I feel like I might have
something to offer. Um,
>> and she is striking a different tone.
she's willing to go there in terms of
being critical of her colleagues and
critical of the institution.
We see this very early in the
affirmative action decision. For
instance, she basically says that her
colleagues are clueless about racism.
>> Justice Jackson, you know, it's
interesting. She is a very warm person
and she's very cautious in interviews,
but on the page she can scorch. And
remember to say that this world is
formal and polite is to put it mildly.
If you say I dissent instead of I
respectfully descent, that is like a
burn. [laughter]
>> So she's quickly establishing herself as
kind of the anti- Kagan.
>> She has a different theory than Justice
Kagan of how to be an effective justice.
She feels she has to be blunt. You know,
like associates of hers have described
her thinking to me and her strategy is
deliberate. She has basically reasoned
that on a 63 chord, she's not going to
persuade her colleagues and any gains
that would be exacted would be so small
that they wouldn't be worth the price of
staying silent.
>> And so in her opinions, she's often
speaking to the public. She's saying,
"You need to know about this. I want to
raise your awareness. I find this
troubling. And you know, it's a kind of
writing for history in which you're
betting that even if nothing happens
immediately, it will result in long-term
change.
And then after Trump gets back into
office and she sees the barrage of
President Trump's legal actions, she
decides she has to warn the public about
what's happening. And so we start seeing
these opinions from Justice Jackson in
which she's writing from inside the
house and she's saying things like this
court is beholden to moneyed interests.
She says this court is enabling our
collective demise. her message in
opinions since President Trump has
gotten back into office sound to me like
she's saying, "I'm sitting here [music]
inside the Supreme Court and I know
these colleagues. I see what's going on
on the inside and it is really bad."
[music]
>> And how is this being received by Kagan
given her approach? things start to get
tense among the liberal justices. There
is just this existential dilemma and
this split in strategy because you have
to realize that Justice Jackson going
for it is potentially very threatening
to Justice Kagan's strategy,
>> right? Look, in practical terms, the
only way for liberals to win on this
court is for Justice Barrett and Chief
Justice Roberts to vote with them. So,
the risk that Justice Jackson is taking
is that she could alienate these people
and then the liberals don't have any
chance at all.
>> That is not the path to Kagan's
metaphorical 30% better ruling.
>> No, it's not. But the Jacksonites, and
remember that Justice Jackson has a lot
of adherence who believe that what she's
doing is very important. What they would
say is, "Justice Kagan, what are you
holding back for? What do you think
you're going to gain from this?" And
they have some evidence to back up their
position,
>> such as what?
>> For example, go back to Colorado and the
question of who's going to serve these
gay couples who want to get married.
>> The Baker case.
>> Yeah, exactly. Another case comes along.
This is like a carbon copy of the Baker
case except that it's a graphic designer
this time who doesn't want to make
wedding websites and invitations for gay
couples. And so this time the
conservatives just win full out and that
little compromise is wiped away. And the
principle is established that yes, a
religious person can refuse to serve a
gay couple because it doesn't comport
with that person's religious beliefs. So
basically, this would be fuel for
Justice Jackson's argument of what is
the point of pretending that we're going
to get something from this conservative
majority. You're not getting your 30%.
Because this court just wiped out the
30% you even thought you got back in
2018.
>> Correct. But my sources debated this to
be honest again and again because there
were Kaganite sources who said Justice
Kagan won 5 years of protection for
these gay couples. Don't knock it.
That's a lot of real people who
benefited from this decision. And on top
of that, Justice Kagan has still gained
some victories on this 63 court. Last
term, she had a win on federal agency
power and she won three votes from the
center of the court. Three three votes
from the chief justice, Justice
Kavanaaugh, Justice Barrett. So there is
still potentially some case for
compromise. So you can go I mean the
liberal
lawy the law professors the Supreme
Court thank you the Supreme Court
advocates they are lit up by this
question of what is the best strategy
and then in the most important case of
last term Justice Jackson finds herself
in a real clash with Justice Barrett.
This was a case called Trump Vicasa in
which the court decided that federal
judges could no longer issue nationwide
injunctions.
And by doing that, they're really
limiting the judiciary's power to stand
up to President Trump.
And so what happens in those opinions is
that Justice Barrett and Justice Jackson
have a giant public fight.
>> [music]
>> Justice Jackson in her descent writes
that quote eventually executive power
will become completely uncontainable and
our beloved constitutional republic will
be no more. And she signs off by saying
with deep disillusionment [music] I
desent.
And those words are a direct criticism
of Justice Barrett, who has written the
majority opinion for the conservatives.
And Justice Barrett, who is usually a
pretty mild writer, she hits back in the
opinions. She says, "We're not even
going to consider some of what Justice
Jackson says here."
>> [music]
>> So this kind of brings to the four the
fear we mentioned which is that justice
Jackson could alienate Justice Barrett
and the Chief Justice.
>> So what we're seeing clearly is both
approaches finding their limits in this
moment. Kagan's compromises are getting
washed away by the sheer severity of the
court's rightward turn and Jackson's
sharply worded descents are beginning to
alienate the conservatives in a way that
might even further marginalize the
courts liberals. So I guess the question
then becomes
which of these strategies is most likely
to work out in the longer term? Yes,
that is certainly a debate. Just as
Jackson appears to have chosen a stance
and have chosen a tone and maybe that
will change, but at least recently she's
been very forceful.
>> Mhm.
>> The justice who really has a decision to
make is Justice Kagan because remember
she's the one who's agonized all these
years over whether she's doing it right.
people close to her who saw her over the
summer, they said she was despondent
about what was going on, that she is
really worried about the state of the
country and the law.
Right now, Michael, as we sit here, this
is when the Supreme Court is making the
real lasting decisions about President
Trump's power. The decisions from last
term were very consequential. They were
also mostly temporary. So the question
>> cans were kicked down the road to now.
>> Exactly. So the question is does Justice
Jackson remain on this path and for
Justice Kagan, who does she ultimately
want to be and how will the strategic
decisions by both of these justices
affect how much power President Trump
ultimately gets and what will that mean
for the court, the country, and the
future of our democracy?
Well, Jody, thank you very [music] much,
>> Michael. It's always a pleasure.
[music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need another day.
On Tuesday, the Democratic governor of
Illinois, JB Pritsker, signed a law that
restricts immigration enforcement
[music] outside state courouses, limits
the information that can be given to
immigration agents, and makes [music] it
easier for residents of the state to sue
immigration agents if they believe their
rights have been violated.
The law is a direct response to
President Trump's crackdown on
undocumented immigrants in the Chicago
area, [music] which has resulted in
thousands of arrests and repeated
clashes between agents and residents.
[music]
But it's unclear if the Trump
administration will observe the new law.
In response to it, the Department of
[music] Homeland Security said that
arresting immigrants in courouses is
legal and quote is common sense.
Today's episode was [music] produced by
Rob Zipo, Mary Wilson, and Ricky Netski.
It was edited by Devin Taylor. contains
[music] music by Brad Fischer, Will
Reed, Marian Lozano, Dan Powell, Rowan
Demisto, and Pat McCusker, and was
engineered by Chris [music] Wood.
That's [music] it for the daily. I'm
Michael Bubaro.
See you tomorrow.
[music]